- # Cycnoches / Swan orchids
  tags::  [[🌱Flora]]
  genus-tag:: [[Cycnoches]] [[Swan Orchids]]
  type-species:: [[Cycnoches pentadactylon]] [[Cycnoches ventricosum]] [[Cycnoches haagii]] [[Cycnoches carrii]] and many more.
  plant-type-tags:: #[[orchids]] #[[epiphytes]] #[[sympodial]]
  family:: #[[Orchidaceae]]
  subfamily:: #[[Epidedroideae]]
  tribe:: #[[Cymbidieae]]
  subtribe:: #[[Catasetinae]] 
  clade:: #[[Tracheophytes]] #[[Angiosperms]] #[[Monocots]] 
  order:: #[[Asparagales]]
  genus:: #[[Cycnoches]] 
  propagation:: yes by #[[stem cutting]]
  maintenance:: #[[medium maintenance]] to #[[high maintenance]]
  water-need:: #[[high water need]] depending on pot position
  substrate:: #[[leca]] / clay pebbles #[[charcoal]] #[[coco choir]] #[[sphagnum moss]] #[[fir bark]]. Extremely #[[welldrained]]
  ph:: #[[ph6.0]]
  npk-rating:: depends on maturity   
  light:: #[[east facing]] or #[[south facing]] #[[partly shade]] bright #[[indirect light]]
  humidity:: depends on plant stage. #[[50%]] - #[[70%]]  
  temperature:: #[[21c]] / #[[70f]] - #[[27c]] / #[[80f]] at day. 
  habitats::  #[[South America]] #[[Southern Mexico]] #[[Central America]]
  dormant:: yes
  seasons::  yes
  uses::
	-
	- Notes:
		- 🤲🏼Care:
			- The crucial factor that requires understanding is the dormancy of the plant;
			  "Once you understand the problems associated with dormancy, the plants are easy to grow. When the new growths are developing, do not give the plants too much water until the new roots are growing,” says Monnier. (link below)
			-
		- Watering and humidity:
			- Don't over water the plant when dormant. Recommended amount is once a weak in this period.
			- During growth, water to maintain moisture.
			- When the plant has produced its flowers, watering should be less frequent or completely stopped until new roots emerge.
			- When roots turns silver-green, the moisture should be higher.
			- While roots are bright green and plump, water after a couple of days.
			-
		- Fertiliser:
			- Don't fertilise while dormant.
			- Mature plant fertiliser npk: 5-50-17
			- Balanced or nitrogen rich fertiliser when the plant are in growth.
			- It is mentioned that the plant can't be over-fertilised while in growth. But treat with caution due to unknown factors.
			- Advanced fertilizing:
				- When potting, a teaspoon of #[[Nutricote]] is added (supposedly mixed into the soil). Sprinkle compost on top and add half-strength liquid fertiliser when watering every other watering.
			- Too much fertiliser may result in stem turning yellow.
		-
		- Soil and potting:
			- A couple of methods are mentioned but after some research, a mix these should work well:
				- #[[sphagnum moss]], #[[coco choir]] which retains nutrients
				- and #[[orchid bark]] or #[[fir bark]] to keep the roots aerated.
				-
			- You can mix your own orchid soil mix but using the different substrate types mentioned above, just make sure to keep roots airy and maintain a nutrient rich soil.
			-
			- Soil composition for awakening #[[pseudobulbs]] is described below.
			-
		- Dormansy:
			- Winter/late fall:
			- At the beginning of dormancy period, the cycnoches are removed from containers/pots.
			- Roots are removed with sterile equipment and the clusters of #[[pseudobulbs]] are separated and placed into new pots. (And watered with new orchids?)
			- Prevent root rot by removing orchid soil mix from bulbs.
			-
			- In spring:
			- When the growth begins, plant the cluster in a pot large enough to sustain the growth of the #[[pseudobulbs]].
			- Monnier's orchid mix for re-potting:
				- Equal part of #[[charcoal]] and #[[leca]] to which 20% #[[coco choir]] is added.
			-
	-
		- 🧪Uses:
		-
		- Links:
			- [How to Grow Cycnoches (Monnier's guide)](https://sonomaorchids.com/orchid-culture-articles-by-genus/cycnoches-culture-sik-no-keys/how-to-grow-cycnoches/)
			- [American Orchid Society - All around care ](https://www.aos.org/orchids/orchids-a-to-z/letter-c/cycnoches.aspx)
			- ["How To Grow And Care For The Swan Orchid (aka Cycnoches)"](https://positivebloom.com/swan-orchid/)
			-
	- Pic
		- first pic: Cycnoches pentadactylon
		-
-